.TH MA_ALLOC_GET 3 "20 February 1997" "MA Release 1.8" "MA LIBRARY ROUTINES"
.SH NAME
MA_alloc_get -
allocate a heap block and get the corresponding base index
.SH "C SYNOPSIS"
.nf
#include "macdecls.h"

Boolean MA_alloc_get(datatype, nelem, name, memhandle, index)
    Integer     datatype;       /* read-only */
    Integer     nelem;          /* read-only */
    char        *name;          /* read-only */
    Integer     *memhandle;     /* write-only */
    Integer     *index;         /* write-only */
.fi
.SH "FORTRAN SYNOPSIS"
.nf
#include "mafdecls.fh"

logical function MA_alloc_get(datatype, nelem, name, memhandle, index)
    integer     datatype
    integer     nelem
    character*(*) name
    integer     memhandle
    integer     index
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
MA_alloc_get() is a convenience function
that combines MA_allocate_heap() and MA_get_index().
MA_alloc_get() allocates a heap block large enough to hold
.I nelem
elements of type
.I datatype
and associates
.I name
with the block for debugging purposes.
A handle for the block is returned in
.I memhandle
and the base index
for the type-specific data array that is appropriate
for the block
is returned in
.IR index .
.SH USAGE
The following FORTRAN code illustrates the use of MA_alloc_get()
by allocating a block of 5 integers on the heap
and then storing values into the integers.

.nf
#include "mafdecls.fh"

    logical ok
    integer mhandle
    integer index
    integer i

    ok = MA_alloc_get(MT_INT, 5, 'heap int block', mhandle, index)
    if (ok) then
        do 10 i = 0, 4
            int_mb(index + i) = 0
10      continue
    endif
.fi
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
block '%s', MA not yet initialized
.in +0.5i
MA_init() must be called before this routine is called.
.in
block '%s', invalid datatype: %d
.in +0.5i
.I datatype
must be one of those listed in macdecls.h or mafdecls.fh.
.in
block '%s', invalid nelem: %d
.in +0.5i
.I nelem
must be greater than zero.
.in
block '%s', not enough space to allocate %d bytes
.in +0.5i
Recovery may be attempted by deallocating unneeded blocks
and resubmitting the request,
or the application may be rewritten to request more memory
initially in the call to MA_init().
.in

Other diagnostics are possible.
If seen,
they indicate corruption of the internal state of MA,
caused by bugs in either MA or the application.
.SH "RETURN VALUE"
C: MA_TRUE upon success, MA_FALSE upon failure.
.br
FORTRAN: .true. upon success, .false. upon failure.
.SH NOTES
Type-specific data arrays are not yet available in C,
so employ pointers instead of indices
by using MA_allocate_heap() and MA_get_pointer()
instead of MA_alloc_get().
.SH FILES
.nf
Include files: /msrc/proj/hpctools/ma/release/current/include
Library:       /msrc/proj/hpctools/ma/release/current/lib/\fIplatform\fR/libma.a
Man pages:     /msrc/proj/hpctools/ma/release/current/man/man3
Source code:   /msrc/proj/hpctools/ma/release/current/tar/ma\fIrelease\fR.tar
.fi
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.na
MA(3),
MA_allocate_heap(3),
MA_free_heap(3),
MA_get_index(3),
MA_get_pointer(3),
MA_inquire_avail(3),
MA_inquire_heap(3)
.ad
.SH AUTHOR
Gregory S. Thomas, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory
