.TH MA_SUMMARIZE_ALLOCATED_BLOCKS 3 "20 February 1997" "MA Release 1.8" " "
.SH NAME
MA_summarize_allocated_blocks -
print information about currently allocated blocks
on the standard output (stdout)
.SH "C SYNOPSIS"
.nf
#include "macdecls.h"

void MA_summarize_allocated_blocks()
.fi
.SH "FORTRAN SYNOPSIS"
.nf
#include "mafdecls.fh"

subroutine MA_summarize_allocated_blocks
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
MA_summarize_allocated_blocks() prints the following information
on the standard output (stdout)
for each block currently allocated on the heap or the stack.

address
.in +0.5i
The location in memory of (i.e., pointer to) the block.
.in
handle
.in +0.5i
The memhandle by which the block is referenced
(returned when the block was allocated).
.in
name
.in +0.5i
The name of the block
(specified when the block was allocated).
.in
type of elements
.in +0.5i
The type of data elements stored in the block
(specified when the block was allocated).
.in
number of elements
.in +0.5i
The number of data elements stored in the block
(specified when the block was allocated).
.in
address of client space
.in +0.5i
The location in memory of (i.e., pointer to) the data elements.
This is the value returned by MA_get_pointer().
.in
index for client space
.in +0.5i
The base index for the appropriate type-specific data array.
This is the value returned by MA_get_index().
.in
total number of bytes
.in +0.5i
The total number of bytes, including overhead, in the block.
.in
.\" .SH USAGE
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
invalid index_base: %d
.in +0.5i
This indicates either that the internal state of MA is corrupted
or that there is a problem in the C-FORTRAN linkage.
.in
.SH "RETURN VALUE"
C: None.
.br
FORTRAN: None.
.\" .SH NOTES
.SH FILES
.nf
Include files: /msrc/proj/hpctools/ma/release/current/include
Library:       /msrc/proj/hpctools/ma/release/current/lib/\fIplatform\fR/libma.a
Man pages:     /msrc/proj/hpctools/ma/release/current/man/man3
Source code:   /msrc/proj/hpctools/ma/release/current/tar/ma\fIrelease\fR.tar
.fi
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.na
MA(3),
MA_print_stats(3)
.ad
.SH AUTHOR
Gregory S. Thomas, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory
