.TH MA_VERIFY_ALLOCATOR_STUFF 3 "20 February 1997" "MA Release 1.8" " "
.SH NAME
MA_verify_allocator_stuff -
sanity check the internal state of MA
.SH "C SYNOPSIS"
.nf
#include "macdecls.h"

Boolean MA_verify_allocator_stuff()
.fi
.SH "FORTRAN SYNOPSIS"
.nf
#include "mafdecls.fh"

logical function MA_verify_allocator_stuff()
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
MA_verify_allocator_stuff() checks each block
currently allocated on the heap or the stack
for checksum and guard errors.
For each error found,
a message is printed 
on the standard output (stdout).
If any errors are found,
a summary message is printed on the standard error (stderr),
else nothing is printed.
.\" .SH USAGE
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
unavailable; recompile MA with -DVERIFY
.in +0.5i
To use this routine,
MA must be compiled with cpp option -DVERIFY.
.in

%s block '%s', handle %d, address 0x%lx:
.in +0.5i
The following diagnostics are each prefixed by this information,
which identifies the corrupted block.
.in

current checksum %lu != stored checksum %lu
.in +0.5i
This indicates that the block has been corrupted
by having its internal state overwritten.
.in
current left signature %u != proper left signature %u
.in +0.5i
This indicates that the block has been corrupted
by being overwritten at the left end.
The likely cause of this is an application indexing bug.
.in
current right signature %u != proper right signature %u
.in +0.5i
This indicates that the block has been corrupted
by being overwritten at the right end.
The likely cause of this is an application indexing bug.
.in
.SH "RETURN VALUE"
C: MA_TRUE upon success (no errors), MA_FALSE upon failure (errors).
.br
FORTRAN: .true. upon success (no errors), .false. upon failure (errors).
.\" .SH NOTES
.SH FILES
.nf
Include files: /msrc/proj/hpctools/ma/release/current/include
Library:       /msrc/proj/hpctools/ma/release/current/lib/\fIplatform\fR/libma.a
Man pages:     /msrc/proj/hpctools/ma/release/current/man/man3
Source code:   /msrc/proj/hpctools/ma/release/current/tar/ma\fIrelease\fR.tar
.fi
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.na
MA(3),
MA_set_auto_verify(3)
.ad
.SH AUTHOR
Gregory S. Thomas, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory
