.. #
.. # @BEGIN LICENSE
.. #
.. # Psi4: an open-source quantum chemistry software package
.. #
.. # Copyright (c) 2007-2024 The Psi4 Developers.
.. #
.. # The copyrights for code used from other parties are included in
.. # the corresponding files.
.. #
.. # This file is part of Psi4.
.. #
.. # Psi4 is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.. # it under the terms of the GNU Lesser General Public License as published by
.. # the Free Software Foundation, version 3.
.. #
.. # Psi4 is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.. # but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.. # MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.. # GNU Lesser General Public License for more details.
.. #
.. # You should have received a copy of the GNU Lesser General Public License along
.. # with Psi4; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation, Inc.,
.. # 51 Franklin Street, Fifth Floor, Boston, MA 02110-1301 USA.
.. #
.. # @END LICENSE
.. #

.. include:: autodoc_abbr_options_c.rst


Release Procedures
==================


.. _`faq:annualprocedure`:

Annual
------

* `On January first`_
* `Update copyright year`_
* `Update counter scripts`_


.. _`faq:prereleaseprocedure`:

Pre-Release (e.g., ``v1.3rc1``)
-------------------------------

* `Update samples`_
* `Collect new authors`_
* `Anticipate next release`_
* `Build Conda ecosystem stack`_
* `Tag (pre)release`_
* `Build extra Conda packages for Psi4 channel`_
* `Build Psi4conda set`_
* `Generate download page for psicode.org`_


.. _`faq:releaseprocedure`:

Release (e.g., ``v1.3``)
------------------------

* `Update samples`_ (if no prerelease)
* `Collect new authors`_ (if no prerelease)
* `Anticipate next release`_ (if no prerelease)
* `Build Conda ecosystem stack`_ (if no prerelease)
* `Run long tests`_
* `Do final pass before release tag`_
* `Tag (pre)release`_
* `Initialize release branch`_
* `Build extra Conda packages for Psi4 channel`_
* `Build Psi4conda set`_
* `Generate download page for psicode.org`_
* `Collect documentation snapshot`_
* `Publish GitHub release`_
* `Publish psicode.org release`_
* `Finalize release`_


.. _`faq:postreleaseprocedure`:

Post-Release (e.g., ``v1.8.2``)
-------------------------------

* `Assemble postrelease changes`_
* `Tweak Conda for postrelease`_
* `Tag postrelease`_
* `Build Psi4conda set`_
* `Build extra Conda packages for Psi4 channel`_
* `Generate download page for psicode.org`_
* `Collect documentation snapshot`_
* `Publish GitHub postrelease`_
* `Publish psicode.org release`_
* `Finalize release`_


On January first
----------------

* Screenshot https://anaconda.org/psi4/psi4 .
* Screenshot https://anaconda.org/conda-forge/psi4 .
* Add new year title and images to website
  https://github.com/psi4/psicode-hugo-website/edit/master/content/posts/downloads.md .
* On the next day, check that the new year's plot appears at https://psicode.netlify.app/posts/downloads/ .


Update copyright year
---------------------

* ``cd ~/path/to/psi4``
* Primary target is licenses

  - ``grep -rl "(c) 2007-2017" * | xargs sed -i '' "s/(c) 2007-2017/(c) 2007-2018/g"``
  - On Linux, drop the ``''`` in above command
  - Need to do mostly ``psi4/`` and ``docs/`` dirs, but top-level is fine

* Also, license in these files

  - ``tests/runtest.py``
  - ``README.md``

* Also, in content of :source:`doc/sphinxman/source/conf.py.in#L130`


Update counter scripts
----------------------

* Log onto vergil as cdsgroup.
* Add new years, Python versions, and Psi4 versions as needed.
* check vergil /home/cdsgroup/psi4meta/download-analysis/installer: vi downloads_updater.py any new patterns to add?
* check vergil if changing any download patterns


Update samples
--------------

* Run ``make sphinxman`` at least once by hand
* Check in resulting ``psifiles.py`` and all the updated and new ``samples/`` files and dirs
* Make a lone PR and warn reviewers not to read it, since autogenerated


Collect new authors
-------------------

* Survey contributions to current Milestone. Add new contributors to the release notes GitHub issue.
* Figure out any new "Additional Contributors" authors since last release.
* Get permission of new authors and their particulars for ``codemeta.json``.
* Edit ``psi4/header.py`` accordingly and make PR.


Run long tests
--------------

* Run the full test suite with threading parallelism on. There's one CC test that's a known fail
  in parallel b/c it sets memory very low, iirc.

  - CTest (CLI)::

      +++ b/tests/runtest.py
      @@ -104,7 +104,7 @@ def backtick(exelist):

       # run psi4 and collect testing status from any compare_* in input file
       if os.path.isfile(infile):
      -    exelist = [psi, infile, outfile, '-l', psidatadir]
      +    exelist = [psi, infile, outfile, '-l', psidatadir, '-n2']
           # On Windows set Python interpreter explicitly as the shebang is ignored
           if sys.platform.startswith('win'):

  - Pytest (API)::

      +++ b/tests/pytests/conftest.py
      @@ -22,6 +22,7 @@ def pytest_collection_modifyitems(config, items):
       def set_up_overall(request, tmp_path_factory):
           import psi4

      +    psi4.core.set_num_threads(2)
           psi4.set_output_file("pytest_output.dat", False)
           os.chdir(tmp_path_factory.getbasetemp())
           request.addfinalizer(tear_down)

      +++ b/tests/pytests/conftest.py
      @@ -34,6 +34,7 @@ def set_up():
           psi4.core.clean()
           psi4.core.clean_timers()
           psi4.core.clean_options()
      +    psi4.set_num_threads(2)
           psi4.set_output_file("pytest_output.dat", True)

  - Pytest (CLI)::

      +++ b/tests/pytests/addons.py
      @@ -223,8 +223,8 @@ def ctest_runner(inputdatloc, *, extra_infiles: List = None, outfiles: List = No
           if Path(psi4.executable).suffix == ".exe":
               command = [psi4.executable, inputdat]
           else:
      -        command = [sys.executable, psi4.executable, inputdat]
      -    _, output = execute(command, infiles_with_contents, outfiles, environment=env, scratch_messy=False)
      +        command = [sys.executable, psi4.executable, inputdat, "-n2"]
      +    _, output = execute(command, infiles_with_contents, outfiles, environment=env, scratch_messy=True)

           success = output["proc"].poll() == 0
           assert success, output["stdout"] + output["stderr"]

* Run a full stdsuite tests to generate new capabilities tables for docs. Detailed instructions are
  in :source:`psi4/share/psi4/scripts/merge_stdsuite.py` .


Anticipate next release
-----------------------

* Bump version in ``codemeta.json``, :source:`codemeta.json#L9`
* Add to branch list in ``azure-pipelines.yml``, :source:`azure-pipelines.yml`


Build Conda ecosystem stack
---------------------------

* By "ecosystem stack", we mean packages that are upstream, downstream, required, and optional for
  a fully featured Psi4 build and which we have some role in packaging.
* These packages (e.g., ``libint``, ``gdma``) should already be updated and built on conda-forge.
  Survey them to check version tick and other key PRs have been merged.
* Changes to targets' "source" and "version" in individual recipes should be edited in psi4
  ``external/*/*/CMakeLists.txt`` files
* Edit any added or dropped dependencies in main :source:`CMakeLists.txt` and docs
  :source:`doc/sphinxman/source/build_planning.rst` .


.. Build Conda ecosystem stack (pre-Spring 2023)
.. ---------------------------------------------
..
.. By "ecosystem stack", mean packages that are upstream, downstream, required, and optional for a fully featured Psi4 build and which we can't get from "defaults" or "conda-forge" channels.
..
.. * Main directions are in [cbcy](https://github.com/psi4/psi4meta/blob/master/conda-recipes/conda_build_config.yaml) and [poodle](https://github.com/psi4/psi4meta/blob/master/psinet-nightly/kitandkapoodle.py)
.. * A couple weeks before the first "rc" is planned, start going through L/LT in poodle, checking with upstream to see if new versions have been released. If good changes present, rebuild the packages, changing the version numbers in the respective recipes
.. * When L/LT all built and passed, edit the individual package version numbers in cbcy and increment to a new ``ltrtver`` with updated version numbers and/or build numbers (only if code changes)
.. * Build L/PSI4. If any trouble, edit psi4 code. Iterate until builds and passes. This stage is the only full ctest & pytest on Psi4+upstream
.. * Build L/RT-MP. If any trouble, edit code in L/RT and rebuild those package(s). Iterate until builds and passes. This stage is the only full ctest & pytest of Psi4+downstream
.. * Build L/DEV. If any trouble, edit psi4 build system, plugin system, or OpenMP setup. Iterate until builds and passes
.. * Build L/DOCS. If any trouble, edit the docs or the tests. Iterate until builds and passes
.. * Results of last should upload to psicode.org (docs) and codecov.io (coverage)
.. * Changes to targets' "source" and "version" in individual recipes should be edited in psi4 ``external/*/*/CMakeLists.txt`` files
.. * Once everything's working on Linux, repeat on Mac
.. * At this point, ready to fine-tune builds of "Psi4 stack"


Assemble postrelease changes
----------------------------

* Collect PRs with "backport" label, and request other backport suggestions through slack.
* Be on the maintenance branch (e.g., ``1.8.x``). ``git fetch upstream`` or any other remotes you're
  going to be cherry-picking from.
* Cherry-pick backport PRs and commits (``git cherry-pick sha``), apply other changes manually, not
  forgetting CI files or samples.
* Possibly apply other changes manually, including:

  - CI file tweaks like LLVM version or dependency constraint.
  - samples files from a docs build.
  - :source:`doc/sphinxman/source/introduction.rst` for any compiler and Python minimum requirements to edit.

* Tag it (`Tag postrelease`_ for details). This is needed to compute a version on a maintenance
  branch to even run. Until the release is published on GH (final step of
  `Publish GitHub postrelease`_), it's ok to revise a tag (force push to maintenance branch).

  - Add or increment patch number in ``psi4/metadata.py``; leave the "z"s. Commit file.
  - Tag with ``git tag -a v1.8.2 -m "v1.8.2"``, then push ``git push --atomic upstream 1.8.x v1.8.2``.

* Test core |PSIfour| thoroughly locally (ecosystem will get tested by c-f) by running
  ``pytest ../tests/ -n auto`` (psithon and psiapi tests). Possibly you may have to step back for
  dependency versions from what master needs.
* Start `Tweak Conda for postrelease`_ PR at conda-forge. This will thoroughly test the ecosystem.
* If more changes are needed, ``git tag -d v1.8.2`` to delete the tag, then make more commits,
  retag, push, and repeat. Try to finalize the postrelease tag within a session or a day, so
  tentative tags don't linger.
* Start the draft parts of `Publish GitHub postrelease`_ from the backported PRs assembled here.


.. Tweak Conda for postrelease (pre-Spring 2023)
.. ---------------------------------------------
..
.. * In psi4-* recipes, find the best combination of master meta.yaml/build.sh and the v1N(x-1)-labeled ones
..
..   - comment out any dependencies in master but not yet in postrelease
..   - add ``{{ dep_bld }}`` entries if needed to step back build. make sure normal operation is ``''``
..
.. * In cbcy,
..
..   - create a postrelease new line and record anything not in continuous order with <> or blanking
..   - step back any dependencies versions or build numbers to ones compatible with the postrelease


Tweak Conda for postrelease
---------------------------

* Start a PR to https://github.com/conda-forge/psi4-feedstock . Always store the PR branch on your
  fork, never on the conda-forge feedstock (or your branch itself will get publically packaged).
  https://github.com/conda-forge/psi4-feedstock/pull/15 is an example.

  - Always: edit ``version`` and ``commit`` jinja variables.
  - Possibly: edit ``source/url`` field for trial locations.
  - Always: edit ``sha256`` jinja variable from e.g., ``curl -sL https://github.com/psi4/psi4/archive/v1.8.2.tar.gz | openssl sha256``
  - Always: edit ``build/number``. Either reset to 0 if version increments or bump if version *doesn't* increment.
  - Possibly: uncomment ``skip: true  # [py != 310]`` if you want to test one Python version on all
    architectures before the whole build matrix (currently 16 builds). After editing this (and
    opening the PR), you'll have to issue a comment ``@conda-forge-admin, please rerender`` for the
    matrix slimming to take effect.
  - Possibly: remove any old patches that are now in the main codebase.
  - Possibly: add in or remove any dependency or ecosystem packages.
  - Possibly: for any relevant addition, make sure ``-D CMAKE_INSIST_FIND_PACKAGE_<project>=ON`` or
    ``-D ENABLE_<project>=ON`` is set in ``build.sh`` and ``bld.bat``.
  - Possibly: add or release version constraints or architecture constraints (e.g., ``[not win]``) on packages.

* Submit the PR and rerender (cmd above). Monitor the CI.
* When all CI lanes are passing *and* the tag is final on the maintenance branch, rerender (may be
  no-op) and merge the PR.
* After all the packages are built on main and show up at https://anaconda.org/conda-forge/psi4/files
  with a couple downloads, this means they're been mirrored and are generally installable. Announce
  on slack general channel.


Do final pass before release tag
--------------------------------

* Check that :source:`external/` repos and commits have been updated to match conda recipes sources. Also check versions with ``conda_build_config.yaml``
* Check :source:`doc/sphinxman/source/introduction.rst` for any compiler and Python minimum requirements to edit.


Tag (pre)release
----------------

* Thorough version bump directions at master http://psicode.org/psi4manual/master/manage_git.html#how-to-bump-a-version
* Below is tl;dr

  ::

    # be on clean master up-to-date with upstream in both commits and tags
    # * mind which version strings get "v" and which don't
    # * if not fork, replace "upstream" with "origin"

    >>> vi psi4/metadata.py
    >>> git diff
    diff --git a/psi4/metadata.py b/psi4/metadata.py
    ...
    -__version__ = '1.3rc1'
    -__version_long = '1.3rc1+5a7522a'
    -__version_upcoming_annotated_v_tag = '1.3rc2'
    +__version__ = '1.3rc2'
    +__version_long = '1.3rc2+zzzzzzz'
    +__version_upcoming_annotated_v_tag = '1.3rc3'

    >>> git add psi4/metadata.py
    >>> git commit -m "v1.3rc2"
    [master bc8d7f5] v1.3rc2

    >>> git log --oneline | head -1
    bc8d7f5 v1.3rc2
    >>> git tag -a v1.3rc2 bc8d7f5 -m "v1.3rc2"

    # goto GH:psi4/psi4 > Settings > Branches > master > Edit
    #      https://github.com/psi4/psi4/settings/branch_protection_rules/424295
    # uncheck "Do not allow bypassing the above settings" for admins and Save changes

    >>> git push --atomic upstream master v1.3rc2

    # pause here and push to upstream and let Azure complete for an
    #       on-tag Windows conda package and docs, not tag+1.dev1 .
    #       the atomic flag below pushes commit and tag together so only one CI
    #       which is necessary for Windows conda package to compute the right version.
    #       After push, can temporarily re-engage admins "Do not allow ..." protections.
    #       also, grab the docs build from GHA artifacts

    >>> vi psi4/metadata.py
    >>> git diff
    diff --git a/psi4/metadata.py b/psi4/metadata.py
    ...
    -__version_long = '1.3rc2+zzzzzzz'
    +__version_long = '1.3rc2+bc8d7f5'

    >>> git add psi4/metadata.py
    >>> git commit -m "Records tag for v1.3rc2"
    [master 16dbd3e] Records tag for v1.3rc2

    # goto GH:psi4/psi4 > Settings > Branches > master > Edit
    #      https://github.com/psi4/psi4/settings/branch_protection_rules/424295
    # uncheck admins "Do not allow ..." and Save changes

    >>> git push upstream master

    # re-engage admins "Do not allow ..." protections


Tag postrelease
---------------

  ::

    # be on clean maintenance branch up-to-date with upstream in both commits and tags
    # * mind which version strings get "v" and which don't
    # * if not fork, replace "upstream" with "origin"

    >>> git checkout 1.3.x
    Switched to branch '1.3.x'

    >>> vi psi4/metadata.py
    >>> git diff
    diff --git a/psi4/metadata.py b/psi4/metadata.py
    ...
    -__version__ = '1.3'
    -__version_long = '1.3+zzzzzzz'
    +__version__ = '1.3.1'
    +__version_long = '1.3.1+zzzzzzz'

    >>> git add psi4/metadata.py
    >>> git commit -m "v1.3.1"
    [1.3.x 2ce1c29] v1.3.1

    >>> git log --oneline | head -1
    786fb2b v1.3.1
    >>> git tag -a v1.3.1 2ce1c29 -m "v1.3.1"

    # skipping the hash recording and "upcoming" step b/c only tags matter on maintenance branch

    # free pushing to maintenance branches at present so GitHub interface steps not needed

    # see note at "Tag (pre)release" for why atomic commit needed. Collect docs from GHA artifacts.

    >>> git push --atomic upstream 1.3.x v1.3.1


Initialize release branch
-------------------------

* follow tagging procedure
* before re-engaging the admins "Do not allow ..." button, push a branch at the tag commit (not the records commit)

  ::

    >>> git log --online | head -2
    45315cb Records tag for v1.3
    20e5c7e v1.3

    >>> git checkout 20e5c7e
    >>> git checkout -b 1.3.x
    Switched to a new branch '1.3.x'
    >>> git push upstream 1.3.x

* set up new branch as protected branch through GitHub psi4 org Settings. Should be already covered under 1.*.x rule.


Build extra Conda packages for Psi4 channel
-------------------------------------------

Once upon a time, "Psi4 stack", meant packages ``psi4``, ``psi4-rt``, ``psi4-dev``, and ``psi4-docs``.
Package ``psi4-docs`` used to be in "Psi4 stack", but it's handled by GHA and netlify now, not Conda.
Package ``psi4-rt`` used to be in "Psi4 stack", but a maximum ecosystem package isn't provided now, only a customizable env spec.
Package ``psi4-dev`` used to be in "Psi4 stack", but now build environment and guidance is in-repo with ``psi4-path-advisor.py``.
Other packages in the "ecosystem stack" (e.g., ``libint``, ``gdma``) should already be updated and
built on conda-forge. Survey them to check version tick PRs have been merged.

Conda-forge overwhelmingly handles the ``psi4`` package itself, with a full architecture and Python
version matrix. What remains are specialty or development builds for the psi4 channel.

* High AM and multiarch ``psi4`` builds for Linux

  - Especially at tagged releases, update and reconcile c-f psi4/feedstock recipe with psinet
    psi4meta/conda-recipes/psi4-cf recipe. Differences include:

    * restricted to only even python versions
    * c-f libint vs. psi4 libint2 packages (latter with high AM)
    * smoke vs. full tests
    * no git rev-parse lines
    * load Intel compilers and specify them in compilers and flags CMake arguments

* Prepare recipe, make sure ``psi4-cf`` is the only target uncommented in ``kitandkapoodle.py``, set
  crontab, view in ``kpd-anom.log``.
* Files will upload to ``psi4/label/dev``. For releases and postreleases, on the anaconda.org site
  (logged in as psi4), *add*, not replace, ``main`` label, so accessible from ``psi4/label/main``.


.. Build Conda Psi4 stack at specific commit (pre-Spring 2023)
.. -----------------------------------------------------------
..
.. By "Psi4 stack", mean packages ``psi4``, ``psi4-rt``, ``psi4-dev``.
.. Package ``psi4-docs`` used to be in "Psi4 stack", but it's handled by GHA and netlify now, not Conda, so skip directions below.
.. Other packages, the "ecosystem stack" (e.g., ``libint``, ``v2rdm_casscf``) should be already built.
..
.. * Check poodle for stray channels that may have crept in for dependencies (like c-f for ACS season). Copy over new dependencies if needed to psi4 channel
.. * Particularly before release (not prerelease), consider max pinnings on dependencies, particularly any fast-moving dependencies (e.g., qcel) and whether they need version space to grow compatibly and grow incompatibly.
.. * Nightly conda-builds work from ``master`` psi4. (Postrelease "practice" works from ``1.N.x`` psi4.)
..
..   - Instead, switch ``source/git_tag`` from ``master`` to tag (e.g., ``v1.3rc1``) in:
..
..     * psi4-multiout on Linux & Mac, https://github.com/psi4/psi4meta/blob/master/conda-recipes/psi4-multiout/meta.yaml#L10
..     * psi4-docs on Linux, https://github.com/psi4/psi4meta/blob/master/conda-recipes/psi4-docs/meta.yaml#L10 on L
..
..   - In cbcy, edit ``psi4ver`` to "v"-less tag
..
.. * For releases and postreleases (not prereleases), in ``conda_build_config.yaml``, edit ``ltrtver`` to a new non-dev label (probably a ditto) matching the release (e.g., "1.3")
.. * Set ``kitandkapoodle.py`` to the normal ``***`` stack. Should be (``psi4``, ``psi4-rt``, ``psi4-dev``) * python_versions for Linux & Mac. Also single ``psi4-docs``     from Linux
.. * Run ``kitandkapoodle.py`` and allow stack to upload to anaconda.org to ``psi4/label/dev``. Poodle emits with ``--label dev`` so will go to the subchannel. May need to delete packages to clear out space on anaconda.org
.. * Copy ``meta.yaml`` and ``build.sh`` of at least ``psi4-multiout`` and ``psi4-rt`` to e.g., v121-build.sh files for easy reference or rebuilding as dependencies in master change.


.. Publish to main conda label (pre-Spring 2023)
.. ---------------------------------------------
..
.. * Go through each active conda package off https://anaconda.org/psi4/repo
..
..   - Find the most recent build set (Linux/Mac, active py versions) that ``psi4``/``psi4-rt``/``psi4-dev`` is using
..   - _add_ (not replace) the ``main`` label.
..
.. * This makes a ``conda install psi4 -c psi4`` get everything psi4 needs. For the moment ``conda install psi4 -c psi4/label/dev`` will get the same set, until package psi4-1.4a1.dev1 gets uploaded. May help to check versions and build versions against ltrtver in ``conda_build_config.yaml``.
.. * This step is manual, so takes a while. (It gets checked when Psi4conda installers are built b/c that pulls from "main", not "dev")


.. Build Psi4conda set (pre-Spring 2021)
.. -------------------------------------
..
.. Installers are build using the project ``constructor`` to build binary bash scripts, one per OS per Python version (e.g., 16 total for linux-64/osx-64/win-64/osx-arm64 and py38/39/310/311). In analogy to Miniconda, they're called Psi4Conda. They can be built anywhere (Mac can be built on Linux) and get served from vergil (cdsgroup webserver).
..
.. * Need a conda env with ``constructor`` and ``cookiecutter``. This env presently accessed through ``conda activate cookie``.
.. * Enter "constructor-cutter-unified" in the psi4meta repo. There's a good README there, https://github.com/psi4/psi4meta/blob/master/conda-recipes/constructor-cutter-unified/README.md
.. * Edit ``cookiecutter/cookiecutter.json`` for control
..
..   - Edit which python versions, if necessary
..   - Edit ``release`` field
..   - Edit ``hash`` field. This is the 7-char hash that's on every psi4 conda pkg as part of version
..   - Edit ``ltrtver`` field. This matches the current setting in ``conda_build_config.yaml``
..   - For prereleases, ``"channel_tag": "/label/dev"``, while for (post)releases, it should be the empty string
..   - Leave this file set to a "rc" with Git, as that has more details
..
.. * For (post)releases (not prereleases), copy cookiecutter.json to cookiecutter.json-vXXX
.. * Edit ``cookiecutter/{{.../construct.yaml`` for templating. This is rarely needed
.. * If it's been a while or you need the space, clear out ``~/.conda/constructor``, where the downloaded packages are cached
.. * Note that installers get written to ``build/`` and this gets regenerated each time. Clear out between runs.
.. * ``python run.py``
.. * [Outdated] Watch out for ``py_`` in buildstring as this means a noarch package has been pulled. It must be eliminated. Constructors can't handle "noarch" packages and will fail at runtime. If see a "noarch" package, must find the recipe and rebuild for all OS & Python combinations. Then run constructor again.
.. * [Replacement] After adding a post_install to reposition the noarch packages, they are safe to include.
.. * If fetching times out, may have to run run.py several times. Clear out build/ in between. It's the fetching that takes a long time, not constucting
.. * In the end, should have several installers
..
..   ::
..
..     >>> ls -l build/psi4conda-1.3-py3.*/*64.sh
..     -rwxr-xr-x. 516M Feb 28 20:30 build/psi4conda-1.3-py3.6-linux-64/psi4conda-1.3-py36-Linux-x86_64.sh
..     -rwxr-xr-x. 299M Feb 28 20:31 build/psi4conda-1.3-py3.6-osx-64/psi4conda-1.3-py36-MacOSX-x86_64.sh
..     -rwxr-xr-x. 518M Feb 28 20:30 build/psi4conda-1.3-py3.7-linux-64/psi4conda-1.3-py37-Linux-x86_64.sh
..     -rwxr-xr-x. 299M Feb 28 20:31 build/psi4conda-1.3-py3.7-osx-64/psi4conda-1.3-py37-MacOSX-x86_64.sh
..
..
.. * Upload installer files to vergil, ``scp -r build/Psi4*/Psi4*sh root@vergil.chemistry.gatech.edu:/var/www/html/psicode-download/``
.. * Log in to vergil root and make WindowsWSL symlinks


Build Psi4conda set
-------------------

Installers are build using the project ``constructor`` to build binary bash or exe scripts, one per
OS per Python version. For example, there's 16 installers when OSes are linux-64, win-64, osx-64,
osx-arm64 and pythons are 38, 39, 310, 311. In analogy to Miniconda, they're called Psi4Conda. They
are built through GHA on the https://github.com/psi4/psi4meta repository and get served from vergil
(the cdsgroup webserver).

* If the previous release hasn't had a snapshot saved, copy ``construct.yaml`` into a version-labeled
  file and check it in.
* Edit recipe https://github.com/psi4/psi4meta/blob/master/installers/construct.yaml

  - Edit the top matter for Configuration, mainly the ``release`` field. See snapshots in directory for examples.
  - Edit the packages and channels info if necessary. Probably long-term stable. sed-like tweaks can go in workflows/Installers.yml

* Edit the GHA control file https://github.com/psi4/psi4meta/blob/master/.github/workflows/Installers.yml
  ``matrix.cfg`` list if Python versions or target architectures have changed.
* All conda packages must already have been built and present in the right channels on
  https://anaconda.org/conda-forge/psi4/files .
* Commit ``construct.yaml`` to trigger installer builds. (Even workflow edits need a dummy commit to
  ``construct.yaml`` to retrigger.)
* When all build successfully, look at the "Filter artifact IDs" GHA step, and copy the ``bash
  pull_gha_installers...`` line. These artifacts only linger for a day.
* Log in to COS vergil root and cd to ``/projects/vergil/sherrill_website/cdsg/static/psicode-download``.
* Use the ``pull_gha_installers_2025.sh`` script to download the installers from GH to COS vergil. First
  argument is an auth token and remaining args are artifact numbers.
  ``bash pull_gha_installers_2025.sh 715...4f3 3280468170 3280468226 3280468291 3280468500``.


Build Docker images
-------------------

Docker images are built through GHA on the https://github.com/psi4/psi4meta repository from a Conda
environment specification and get served from DockerHub, https://hub.docker.com/r/psi4/psi4/tags .

* Edit specification https://github.com/psi4/psi4meta/blob/master/docker/environment.yaml

  - Edit the packages and channels info if necessary. Probably long-term stable.
  - Don't edit the Python version, as that's controlled by the GHA.

* Edit the GHA control file https://github.com/psi4/psi4meta/blob/master/.github/workflows/Docker.yml
  ``matrix.cfg`` list for changed Python version and to label the tags with current Psi4 from c-f.
* Commit ``environment.yaml`` or ``Docker.yml`` to trigger GHA Docker builds.
* Check at DockerHub for new images.


.. Generate download page for psicode.org (pre-Fall 2023)
.. ------------------------------------------------------
..
.. * Be in repo psicode-hugo-website
.. * Copy and edit new file akin to https://github.com/psi4/psicode-hugo-website/blob/master/content/installs/v13rc2.md. Note the edition string ``v13rc2`` in frontmatter for this and future filenames
.. * Copy and edit new file akin to https://github.com/psi4/psicode-hugo-website/blob/master/data/installs/v13rc2.yaml for menu and notes content
.. * Enter ``scripts/`` dir and edit primarily https://github.com/psi4/psicode-hugo-website/blob/master/scripts/install-generator.py#L9 but also any other arrays or messages that should change.
.. * Run the  ``install-generator.py`` in place. It will dump new files into ``data/installs/`` _subdirs_. Be sure to ``git add`` them.
.. * Installer page is now ready.
.. * Shift "latest" alias in frontmatter from whichever page is currently active to the new page. This makes sure "Downloads" on the navigation bar points to new page.
.. * Conscientiously, one should test
..
..   - installer downloads in Mac and Linux. And actually installing them and ``psi4 --test`` them.
..   - that download button and ``curl`` downloading register on the download counters on vergil
..
.. * Commit the new files, PR, and deploy psicode site
.. * Petition on Slack for testers


Generate download page for psicode.org
--------------------------------------

* Be in local clone of repository https://github.com/psi4/psicode-hugo-website .
* Copy and edit a new file akin to ``content/installs/v182.md``. Add it to the git index.

  - Note the edition string ``v182`` in frontmatter for this and future filenames.
  - Don't postdate the date string in frontmatter or it won't render.
  - Ultimately, make sure the ``aliases:\n  - /installs/latest/`` lines are *added* to this new file
    and *removed* from the previous latest file, but this can wait until the installer page has been tested.

* Copy and edit a new file akin to ``data/installs/v182.yaml``. Add it to the git index.

  - Glance through the menu and notes content to make sure they're up-to-date. This file determines
    the structure of the install page.
  - Add or remove python versions and architectures if necessary.
  - Every couple years, update the default python version in ``datakey: python``/``selected`` *and*
    in ``optsHandler`` at the end.
  - Always adjust the ``datakey: branch``/``stable`` block.
  - For releases, adjust the ``datakey: branch``/``previous`` and ``nightly`` blocks.

* Enter the ``scripts/`` directory. If the previous release hasn't had a snapshot saved, copy
  ``install-generator.py`` into a version-labeled file, and add it to the git index.
* Edit ``scripts/install-generator.py``.

  - Primarily, edit ``edition`` at the top.
  - Also, edit other arrays (stuff above ``## Outputs``) or messages (logic below ``## Outputs``)
    that should change.

* Run the ``install-generator.py`` in place. It will dump two new files, e.g.,
  ``data/installs/cmd/{edition}.json`` and ``data/installs/dlbtn/{edition}.json``. Add these to the
  index (no need to inspect them).

* The installer page is now ready for inspection. Run ``hugo server --watch=false`` and view in
  browser at http://localhost:1313/ . Click around the options to make sure the buttons and
  instructions all look right.

* Iterate on the ``data/installs/{edition}.yaml`` and the ``install-generator.py`` until correct.
  It's fine to push to psicode.org to see it in place. But wait until it's final (and all the
  packages and installers are ready) to shift "latest" alias in frontmatter from whichever page is
  currently active to the new page, ``content/installs/{edition}.md``. This makes sure "Downloads"
  on the navigation bar points to the new page.

* Commit the new files, PR, and deploy psicode site.


.. Collect documentation snapshot (pre-Fall 2023)
.. ----------------------------------------------
..
.. * Documentation is built automatically by GHA from the latest psi4 master commit. It gets pushed to the psi4/psi4docs repository and thence served by netlify to a site independent of psicode.org. The netlify psicode.org site has a redirect so that psicode.org/psi4manual/master presents the psi4docs netlify content.
.. * GHA controller is :source:`.github/workflows/docs.yml`
.. * This setup works great for "latest" docs, but it won't build a nice copy on the tag because the tag commit is pushed before the tag itself, so the version shows up "undefined".
.. * So, anytime after "Tag (pre)release" is over, navigate on psi4 GH to the tag commit (not the record commit) and retrigger the docs GHA. Download the artifact (zipped docs dir) at the end to a local computer.
.. * In your hugo site clone, create a new directory under ``static/psi4manual``. Copy the zipped docs there, unpack, rearrange so that ``static/psi4manual/<new-tag>/index.html`` is present. Check in.


Collect documentation snapshot
------------------------------

* Documentation is built automatically by GHA from the latest psi4 master commit. It gets pushed to
  a special "master" folder on the https://github.com/psi4/psi4docs repository. From there, it and
  other docs snapshots are built and served to https://psi4.github.io/psi4docs/master/ (independent
  of psicode.org). The netlify psicode.org site has a redirect so that
  https://psicode.org/psi4manual/master/index.html presents the psi4docs repo content.

  - GHA sphinx-build controller is :source:`.github/workflows/docs.yml`
  - GHA gh-pages deploy controller is https://github.com/psi4/psi4docs/blob/master/.github/workflows/docs.yml
  - Netlify psicode redirect controller is https://github.com/psi4/psicode-hugo-website/blob/master/netlify.toml#L10-L15

* This setup works great for "latest" docs, but it won't necessarily build a nice copy on the tag
  commit itself for release and postrelease snapshots. Get a snapshot *on the tag* by some means:

  - For releases and postreleases, any commit to the maintenance branch will build docs and upload
    to the branch name in psi4docs. This should be pre-positioned by GHA, so check that docs with
    the right version are deployed and then no further action required (can skip ahead to README.md
    and netlify.toml steps).
  - For releases, you can do the ``atomic`` push of the tag commit, wait for the docs build to
    complete, download the GHA artifact (zipped docs dir), then continue by pushing the record commit.
  - For releases beyond the ``atomic`` push, navigate on psi4 GH to the tag commit (not the record
    commit) and retrigger the docs GHA, then download the GHA artifact (zipped docs dir).
  - For postreleases, build the docs locally at the tag and collect the docs dir.

* In your local clone of https://github.com/psi4/psi4docs, find the appropriate folder and unpack
  your docs snapshot into it.

  - For releases, you'll need to make a new folder, e.g. ``sphinxman/1.8.x``.
  - For postreleases, you'll overwrite the contents of the existing folder.
  - Unpack and rearrange so that in the end, e.g., ``sphinxman/1.8.x/index.html`` is present.

* Commit all your docs files and push to ``master``.
* For releases, add a line to the top-level table https://github.com/psi4/psi4docs/edit/master/README.md .
* For releases, add a new redirects block to https://github.com/psi4/psicode-hugo-website/edit/master/netlify.toml .

* Details:

  - If you sequentially push the tag commit, push the tag, push the record commit, GHA will build the docs at v1.{Y+1}.dev1, not at v1.Y .
  - If you sequentially push the tag commit, then push the tag, GHA will build the docs at the tag commit, but the version will show up as "undefined".
  - If you ``atomic`` push the tag commit and tag together and wait, GHA will build the docs at v1.Y, as desired.


Publish GitHub release
----------------------

* With an anticipated or newly minted tag, go to https://github.com/psi4/psi4/releases/new (or
  "Draft a new release" button on GitHub site).
* Release title takes the form: ``v1.8, 2023-05-11``
* Fill in frontmatter style and links from previous GitHub release
* Fill in RN from hopefully existing RN issue.
* Fill in RN by going through the frontmatter from all PRs from this milestone, particularly the
  "User API & Changelog headlines" section.
* Save the draft release until tag is finalized.
* "publish" release. This establishes the release date for the GitHub API.
* Close the RN issue.
* Close the milestone (should be 100% complete).
* Open a milestone for the release that's a year out.


Publish GitHub postrelease
--------------------------

* With an anticipated or newly minted tag, go to https://github.com/psi4/psi4/releases/new (or
  "Draft a new release" button on GitHub site).
* Release title takes the form: ``v1.8.2, 2023-10-03``
* Fill in frontmatter style and links from previous GitHub release.
* Fill in RN bullets for changes cherry-picked or edited to the maintenance branch.
* Save the draft release until tag is finalized.
* "publish" release. This establishes the release date for the GitHub API.


Publish psicode.org release
---------------------------

* Be in local clone of repository https://github.com/psi4/psicode-hugo-website .
* Execute https://api.github.com/repos/psi4/psi4/releases/latest or
  https://api.github.com/repos/psi4/psi4/releases/tags/v1.8.2 (substituting tag) and note the ``id``
  field value.
* Copy and edit a new file akin to ``content/posts/v182.md``. Add it to the git index.

  - e.g., ``v1.8.2`` is used for Title and Release Notes.
  - e.g., ``1.8.x`` is used for Documentation and Source.
  - e.g., ``v182`` (edition string) is used for Image and Installers.
  - Use the ``id`` value in the shortcode call at the bottom near ``ghRN``.

* Add a new release page to the ``psi4_release_fireworks.key`` Keynote presentation. Run the slide
  transition and screenshot the fireworks. Open the PNG file in Preview and save as JPEG while
  downsampling to ~400kB. Place the file at e.g., ``static/images/portfolio/fireworks_slide_v182.jpg``.
  Add it to the git index.
* Edit ``data/portfolio.yml`` to add a new block for the release (order matters).
* Include these changes in a PR. Check the generated preview if needed. Merge the PR yourself or ask
  for it to be merged.


Finalize release
----------------

* Make new PR with
  * edits to main ``README.md`` badges, python versions, etc.
* Tweet about release


.. Reset psi4meta for nightly operation (pre-Spring 2023)
.. ------------------------------------------------------
..
.. On both Linux and Mac:
..
.. * After (post)release (not prerelease), in ``conda_build_config.yaml``, edit ``ltrtver`` to a new "release.dev" label
.. * After postrelease, unpin any dependencies in cbcy that needed older either ver or bld (e.g., v2rdm_casscf_bld)
.. * Edit ``psi4ver`` back to ``''`` in cbcy
.. * Edit ``source/git_tag`` back to ``master`` for psi4-multiout, psi4-docs
.. * Edit build string back to ``0`` if psi4-multiout needed multiple passes
.. * Edit kitandkapoodle.py back to ``***`` stack
.. * Check in all release, construct, recipe changes on Linux and Mac. Synchronize both to GitHub psi4meta
.. * Copy meta.yaml and build.sh files to vMmp-prefixed files for the record.
.. * Edit crontab back to 2am "norm". Comment out "anom"


Misc.
-----

* Consider rebuilding the |PSIfour| binder image.
* If you want to do trial conda builds from a maintenance branch w/o pushing the tag, requires
  ``source/git_tag: 1.3.x`` and fake ``package/version: v1.3.1rc1``

