.. #
.. # @BEGIN LICENSE
.. #
.. # Psi4: an open-source quantum chemistry software package
.. #
.. # Copyright (c) 2007-2024 The Psi4 Developers.
.. #
.. # The copyrights for code used from other parties are included in
.. # the corresponding files.
.. #
.. # This file is part of Psi4.
.. #
.. # Psi4 is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify
.. # it under the terms of the GNU Lesser General Public License as published by
.. # the Free Software Foundation, version 3.
.. #
.. # Psi4 is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
.. # but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
.. # MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
.. # GNU Lesser General Public License for more details.
.. #
.. # You should have received a copy of the GNU Lesser General Public License along
.. # with Psi4; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation, Inc.,
.. # 51 Franklin Street, Fifth Floor, Boston, MA 02110-1301 USA.
.. #
.. # @END LICENSE
.. #

.. include:: autodoc_abbr_options_c.rst

.. index::
   single: MP2-F12

.. _`sec:mp2f12`:

MP2-F12: Explicitly Correlated MP2
==================================

.. codeauthor:: Erica Mitchell
.. sectionauthor:: Erica Mitchell

*Module:* :ref:`Keywords <apdx:f12>`, :ref:`PSI Variables <apdx:f12_psivar>`, :source:`MP2-F12 <psi4/src/psi4/f12>`

Introduction
------------

Convergence of the one-particle basis set to the electronic cusp is slow with traditional methods. This slow convergence is 
inherent in all traditional electronic structure methods and has led to the construction of what are called explicitly 
correlated methods. Explicitly correlated methods include terms that have the interelectronic distance within them significantly increasing 
the speed at which convergence to the electronic cusp is achieved. These explicitly correlated terms contain the correlation 
factor, :math:`f_{12}`, which describes the behavior of the electronic cusp. The correlation factor is the defining part of 
explicitly correlated methods.

The inclusion of :math:`f_{12}` into the equations makes the prefactor for the computation much larger than traditional 
methods. When running MP2-F12, the 3C(FIX) Ansatz is utilized along with the complementary auxiliary basis set (CABS) approach 
resulting in an :math:`{\cal O}(N^5)` scaling separate from the prefactor. To lower the prefactor, density-fitting may be 
utilized but scaling will remain the same.

An example input file is::

   molecule h2o {
   0 1
   O
   H 1 1.0
   H 1 1.0 2 104.5
   symmetry c1
   }

   set {
     basis         cc-pvtz-f12
     cabs_basis    cc-pvtz-f12-optri
     df_basis_f12  aug-cc-pvtz-ri
     freeze_core   True
     mp2_type      df
     f12_beta      1.0
     cabs_singles  True
   }

   energy('mp2-f12')

The ``energy('mp2-f12')`` call to :py:func:`~psi4.driver.energy` executes the predefined MP-F12 procedure, 
first calling the SCF module with a default RHF reference. The two-electron integrals may be solved either with 
or without DF, as specified with |f12__mp2_type|. The general outline of an MP2-F12 computation is as follows:

    (1) Form the CABS AO to MO transformation matrix
    (2) Compute the one- and two-electron integrals
    (3) Construct the F12 intermediates, :math:`V`, :math:`X`, :math:`C`, and :math:`B`
    (4) Solve the F12 energy equation for each occupied orbital pair

The results will then look something like::

   ===> DF-MP2-F12/3C(FIX) Energies <===

    Total DF-MP2-F12/3C(FIX) Energy:      -76.362440627264
       RHF Reference Energy:              -76.059038661557
       MP2 Correlation Energy:             -0.276433879145
       F12/3C(FIX) Correlation Energy:     -0.026029803210
       CABS Singles Correction:            -0.000938283352

The theory and common keywords used in MP2-F12 are presented below. 

.. index::
   pair: MP2-F12; theory

Theory
------

In MP2-F12, the second-order MBPT energy may be determined by minimizing the Hylleraas functional,

.. math::
   :label: HylleraasFunctional

   E^{(2)} = \langle \psi^{(1)} | \hat{H}^{(0)} - E^{(0)} | \psi^{(1)} \rangle 
   + 2 \langle \psi^{(1)} | \hat{H}^{(1)} | \psi^{(0)} \rangle = = \min_{| \psi^{(1)} \rangle}

The resulting linear first-order equations can then be broken down into the conventional residual and the explicitly 
correlated residual,

.. math::
   :label: Residuals

   R^{ij}_{ab} = G^{ij}_{ab} + (\epsilon_a + \epsilon_b - \epsilon_i - \epsilon_j) T^{ij}_{ab} + T^{ij}_{mn} C^{mn}_{ab} \\
   R^{ij}_{kl} = V^{ij}_{kl} + C^{kl}_{ab} T^{ij}_{ab} + \left[ B_{kl,mn} - (\epsilon_i + \epsilon_j)X_{kl,mn} \right] T^{ij}_{mn}

where the last term of the :math:`R^{ij}_{ab}` couples the two residuals. Within the 
residuals, the correlation factor, :math:`f_{12}`, and the projector, :math:`\hat{Q}_{12}`, 
are present in what are known as the F12 intermediates,

.. math::
   :label: Short_F12_Intermediates

   V^{ij}_{kl} &= \langle ij | r_{12}^{-1} \hat{Q}_{12} f_{12} | kl \rangle \\
   X_{kl,mn} &= \langle kl | f_{12} \hat{Q}_{12} f_{12} | mn \rangle \\
   C^{kl}_{ab} &= \langle kl | f_{12} \hat{Q}_{12} \left( \hat{F}_1 + \hat{F}_2 \right) | ab \rangle \\
   B_{kl,mn} &= \langle kl | f_{12} \hat{Q}_{12} \left( \hat{F}_1 + \hat{F}_2 \right) \hat{Q}_{12} f_{12} | mn \rangle \\

The correlation factor and projector are what hold the majority of the approximations made in F12 theory. Firstly, the correlation 
factor is what describes the electronic cusp but, similar to how a nuclear cusp is simulated by contracted Gaussian-type orbitals, 
the :math:`f_{12}` is composed of multiple Gaussian-type geminals to imitate a Slater-type geminal,

.. math::
   :label: Correlation_Factor

   f_{12} = \frac{1 - e^{-\beta r_{12}}{\beta} \approx \sum^6_{n=1} c_n e^{-\alpha_n r_{12}^2}

where the coefficients and exponents are taken from Tew and Klopper [Tew:2005:074101]_ and can be scaled using the parameter :math:`\beta`.
Secondly, the projector is what holds the chosen Ansatz. In other words, the projector determines the choice of orthogonalization between 
the explicitly correlated functions and to the conventional doubly substituted determinants. The strongest orthogonality is observed with

.. math::
   :label: Ansatz_3

   \hat{Q}_{12} = (1-\hat{O}_1)(1-\hat{O}_2) - \hat{V}_1 \hat{V}_2

where :math:`\hat{O}` represents :math:`| i \rangle\langle i |` and :math:`\hat{V}` represents :math:`| a \rangle\langle a |`. This form of 
the projector is known as Ansatz 3.

Within modern F12 theory, the ansatz inherently holds the resolution-of-identity (RI). The RI can be taken as functions from the 
orbital basis set (OBS) and a chosen auxiliary basis set (ABS). It was observed by Valeev [Valeev:2004:190]_ that the choice of ABS 
can affect the error due to the use of a finite RI. He proposed that the ABS include the OBS explicitly so that the exact orthogonal 
complement projector :math:`\hat{Q}_{12} = 1 - \hat{P}_{12}` is properly approximated. This lead to what is known as the complementary 
auxiliary basis set or CABS. The expanded Ansatz 3 projector with the RI and CABS is then

.. math::
   :label: CABS_Ansatz_3

   \hat{Q}_{12} = 1 - | a'j \rangle\langle a'j | - | ib' \rangle\langle ib' | - | rs \rangle\langle rs |

When applying the projector within the CABS approach to the F12 intermediates, the :math:`C` and :math:`B` intermediates contain terms which 
require commutation of the correlation factor, :math:`f_{12}`, and the Fock operator, :math:`\hat{F}`. To factorize these, there are three 
different approaches, A, B, and C. In general, Ansatz 3 with approximation C, or Ansatz 3C, is computationally cheaper than ans{\"a}tze 3A 
and 3B. In Ansatz 3C, the unit operator in the projector is treated with the commutator approach while the rest utilizes direct RI 
expansions. Within Ansatz 3C, the F12 intermediates then take the form

.. math::
   :label: Long_F12_Intermediates

   V^{ij}_{kl} &= (\overline{gf})^{ij}_{kl} - \overline{g}^{ij}_{a'n}\overline{f}^{a'n}_{kl} -
                  \overline{g}^{ij}_{mb'}\overline{f}^{mb'}_{kl} - \overline{g}^{ij}_{rs}\overline{f}^{rs}_{kl} \\
   X_{kl,mn} &= \left(f^2\right)^{kl}_{mn} - \overline{f}^{kl}_{ib'}\overline{f}^{ib'}_{mn} -
                \overline{f}^{kl}_{a'j}\overline{f}^{a'j}_{mn} - \overline{f}^{kl}_{pq}\overline{f}^{pq}_{mn} \\
   C^{kl}_{ab} &= \overline{f}^{kl}_{ab'}F^{b'}_{b} + \overline{f}^{kl}_{a'b}F^{a'}_{a} \\
   B_{kl,mn} &= \langle kl|[\hat{f}_{12},[\hat{T}_{12},\hat{f}_{12}]]|mn\rangle + \hat{S}_{mn,kl} \left[ (\overline{f^2})^{p'l}_{mn}(F + K)^k_{p'} 
                + (\overline{f^2})^{kq'}_{mn}(F + K)^l_{q'} \right] \\
               &- \overline{f}^{p'q'}_{mn}K^{r'}_{p'}\overline{f}^{kl}_{r'q'} - \overline{f}^{p'j}_{mn}F^{r'}_{p'}\overline{f}^{kl}_{r'j} + 
                  \overline{f}^{ib'}_{mn}F^{j}_{i}\overline{f}^{kl}_{jb'} - \overline{f}^{pb}_{mn}F^{r}_{p}\overline{f}^{kl}_{rb} \\
               &- 2\hat{S}_{mn,kl}\left[ \overline{f}^{ib'}_{mn}F^{p'}_{i}\overline{f}^{kl}_{p'b'} + 
                  \overline{f}^{a'b}_{mn}F^{q}_{a'}\overline{f}^{kl}_{qb} \right]

where the following integral types are revealed,

.. math::
   :label: Integral_Types

   &\langle p'q'|r_{12}^{-1}|r's'\rangle = g^{p'q'}_{r's'} \\
   &\langle p'q'|\hat{f}_{12}|r's'\rangle = f^{p'q'}_{r's'} \\
   &\langle p'q'|\hat{f}_{12}^{2}|r's'\rangle= (f^2)^{p'q'}_{r's'} \\
   &\langle p'q'|\hat{f}_{12}\:r_{12}^{-1}|r's'\rangle = (gf)^{p'q'}_{r's'} \\
   &\langle p'q'|[\hat{f}_{12},[\hat{T}_{12},\hat{f}_{12}]]|r's'\rangle

Before the energy expression can be revealed, the choice of explicitly correlated amplitudes must be taken into account. Although the 
residuals can both be set to zero to solve for the minimized amplitudes, it has been determined that the best approach is by utilizing 
the electronic cusp conditions so that the *s*- and *p*- wave coalesence conditions are met [Tenno:2004:117]_. This results in only the 
conventional residual, :math:`R^{ij}_{ab}`,  being minimized and the explicitly correlated amplitudes being

.. math::
   :label: Fixed_Amps

   T^{ij}_{kl} = \frac{3}{8}\delta_{ik}\delta{jl} + \frac{1}{8}\delta_{jk}\delta{il}

which is denoted as the 3C(FIX) Ansatz. The 3C(FIX) Ansatz has the benefits that it is free from the geminal basis set superposition error, 
orbital invariant, and diagonal. Since only diagonal terms are needed, the computational complexity reduces from :math:`{\cal O}(N^6)` with 
the minimized amplitudes to :math:`{\cal O}(N^5)` with fixed amplitudes.

Finally, the F12/3C(FIX) energy correction can be expressed as 

.. math::
   :label: F12_Correction

   \Delta E_\mathrm{F12/3C(FIX)} = T^{ij}_{kl} \left( 2\Tilde{V}^{ij}_{kl} + \Tilde{B}^{ij}_{kl,mn} T^{ij}_{mn} \right)

where :math:`\Tilde{V}^{ij}_{kl}` and :math:`\Tilde{B}^{ij}_{kl,mn}` are

.. math::
   :label: Tilde_Intermediates

   \Tilde{V}^{ij}_{kl} &= V^{ij}_{kl} - \frac{C^{kl}_{ab} G^{ij}_{ab}}{\epsilon_a + \epsilon_b - \epsilon_i - \epsilon_j} \\
   \Tilde{B}^{ij}_{kl,mn} &= B_{kl,mn} - (\epsilon_i + \epsilon_j)X_{kl,mn} - \frac{C^{mn}_{ab} C^{kl}_{ab}}{\epsilon_a + \epsilon_b - \epsilon_i - \epsilon_j}

With the slow convergence of the conventional doubles energy handled, the primary source of error then comes from the basis set 
incompleteness error from the HF reference. When the CABS is utilized, the relaxation of the HF orbitals in the presence of the 
CABS needs to be accounted for. This is done using the what's termed the CABS singles correction. The CABS singles correction 
is reminiscent of the singles correction in MP2 without a RHF or UHF reference,

.. math::
   :label: CABS_Singles

   \Delta E_\mathrm{CABS Singles} = \frac{|F_i^\alpha|^2}{\epsilon_\alpha - \epsilon_i}

where :math:`\alpha` runs over all virtual orbitals, OBS virtuals and CABS.

Therefore, the most accurate MP2-F12/3C(FIX) energy is given by

.. math::
   :label: MP2-F12_3C_FIX

   E_\mathrm{MP2-F12/3C(FIX)} = E_\mathrm{MP2} + \Delta E_\mathrm{F12} + \Delta E_\mathrm{CABS Singles}

Recommendations
---------------

MP2-F12 is a complicated theory but the implemented module should be simple to use. All keywords are 
appropriately documented in the Appendix :ref:`apdx:f12` and care should be taken to read through 
them before changing defaults. Some basic recommendations for running the module are included below:

* MP2-F12 runs much faster with density-fitted integrals. Unless high accuracy is needed, DF requires much 
  less computational resources and still provides quality results. If DF is chosen, the HF and MP2 modules 
  are also set to run DF. Choose a DF basis set with at least triple-zeta quality as 
  |PSIfours| :ref:`DF-SCF <sec:scf>` module performs poorly with lower quality DF basis sets. 
  This module utilizes robust density-fitting [Dunlap:2000:2113]_ so energies may differ from other programs.
  The default |f12__mp2_type| is ``DF``.

* The length-scale parameter ``F12_BETA`` has been fiddled with in many past studies and they have determined 
  that the exponents 0.9, 1.0, and 1.0 :math:`a_0^{-1}` are recommended for cc-pVXZ-F12 where X = D, T, and Q, 
  respectively, while those for aug-cc-pVXZ where X = D, T, and Q are 1.1, 1.2, and 1.4 :math:`a_0^{-1}`. 
  The default value is set to 1.0 :math:`a_0^{-1}` to allow flexibility of use.

* MP2-F12 likes threads. The module was developed with threading in mind and the formation of the 
  integrals and the tensor contractions rely on the threads for efficiency.

* MP2-F12 is memory greedy. The core algorithm has been developed to compute the integrals on-the-fly but 
  the size of some integrals cannot be avoided. Care should be taken to choose whether the core or disk 
  algorithm is chosen, ``F12_TYPE``.

* Like most wavefunction methods, freezing the core is good for both efficiency and correctness purposes.

* MP2-F12 is not symmetry aware.

* MP2-F12 cannot use Psi4's Schwarz screening due to the presence of mixed basis sets. This is a work 
  in progress but siginificantly increases the computational prefactor.

* At the moment, the MP2-F12 code is only compatible with RHF references.
