.TH MA_POP_STACK 3 "20 February 1997" "MA Release 1.8" "MA LIBRARY ROUTINES"
.SH NAME
MA_pop_stack -
deallocate a stack block
.SH "C SYNOPSIS"
.nf
#include "macdecls.h"

Boolean MA_pop_stack(memhandle)
    Integer     memhandle;      /* read-only */
.fi
.SH "FORTRAN SYNOPSIS"
.nf
#include "mafdecls.fh"

logical function MA_pop_stack(memhandle)
    integer     memhandle
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
MA_pop_stack() deallocates the stack block corresponding to the handle
.I memhandle
(which was returned by MA_push_get() or MA_push_stack()
when the block was allocated),
which must be at the top of the stack
(i.e., the stack block most recently allocated).
.\" .SH USAGE
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
invalid memhandle: %d
.in +0.5i
.I memhandle
is not a valid handle.
.in
invalid checksum for memhandle %d (name: '%s')
.in +0.5i
The block's computed checksum does not match its stored checksum.
This indicates that the block has been corrupted
by having its internal state overwritten.
.in
invalid guard(s) for memhandle %d (name: '%s')
.in +0.5i
This indicates that the block has been corrupted
by being overwritten at one or both ends.
The likely cause of this is an application indexing bug.
.in
memhandle %d (name: '%s') not in stack
.in +0.5i
The block is not currently allocated in the stack.
.in
memhandle %d (name: '%s') not top of stack
.in +0.5i
The block is currently allocated in the stack,
but is not at the top of the stack.
.in

Other diagnostics are possible.
If seen,
they indicate corruption of the internal state of MA,
caused by bugs in either MA or the application.
.SH "RETURN VALUE"
C: MA_TRUE upon success, MA_FALSE upon failure.
.br
FORTRAN: .true. upon success, .false. upon failure.
.\" .SH NOTES
.SH FILES
.nf
Include files: /msrc/proj/hpctools/ma/release/current/include
Library:       /msrc/proj/hpctools/ma/release/current/lib/\fIplatform\fR/libma.a
Man pages:     /msrc/proj/hpctools/ma/release/current/man/man3
Source code:   /msrc/proj/hpctools/ma/release/current/tar/ma\fIrelease\fR.tar
.fi
.SH "SEE ALSO"
.na
MA(3),
MA_push_get(3),
MA_push_stack(3),
MA_inquire_avail(3),
MA_inquire_stack(3)
.ad
.SH AUTHOR
Gregory S. Thomas, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory
